# 统计学基础II: 回归分析

## Course Description

This course provides an introduction to principles, terminology and strategies for statistical modelling with the linear model as initial framework for data analysis. The emphasis in the course is on the understanding the logic behind the modelling techniques. Topics covered include the simple and multiple linear regression (statistical properties of the least squares estimators, the best linear unbiased estimators, the Gauss-Markov theorem, the maximum likelihood estimators, sums of squares, inference for regression model, prediction, model selection), model diagnostic checking (examination of multicollinearity), ridge regression (cross validation), logistic regression, single factor and multiple-factor analysis of variance (interaction, estimation and inference), generalized linear model (exponential family of distribution).

## Learning Outcomes

After completing this course, students should be familiar with a range of existing statistical models, especially the linear models, and understand fully the logic and theoretical properties behind them. Students should also master a few new basic probability and statistical models to address real life problem.

## Course Requirements

It is recommneded to have had an introductory class covering descriptive (e.g. mean, variance, correlation) and inferential statistics (e.g. hypothesis tests).

## Course Content

### Simple Linear Regression

Least-squares estimators, the best linear unbiased estimators, the Gauss-Markov theorem, the maximum likelihood estimators, distributional properties of the estimators, sums of squares, inference for the model predicition an estimation.

### Multiple Linear Regression

Linear regression model in matrix form, estimation and their theoretical properties, sums of squares, model fitness, r^2, inference, extra sum of squares, model selection process, all-possible-regression selection, AIC, sequential selection method (backward and forward selection, stepwise selection).

### Model Diagnostic Checking

Examination of multicollinearity, box-cox transformation (handling non-linear relation)

### Ridge Regression

Ridge regression estimator and properties, model selection, cross validation (leave-one-out, k-fold, generalized cross validation).

### Logistic Regression

MLE, iterative method.

### Single-factor and Multiple-factor Analysis of Variance

Factor, factor level, treatment, model with or without interaction, etimation, partition of total sum of squares, ANOVA table, testing for interaction / main effect, relation between linear regression and ANOVA.

### Generalized Linear Models

Exponential family of distributions, link function, approximated distribtuion.
